# Your small project management

This repository provides an R package which helps with project management in R.
It provides a predefined folder and file structure, and convenient functions
which help make the project self contained, shareable and reproducible.

## Installation

In order to work with the project management tool you need to be able building
R packages locally. This includes the installation of the GNU software
development tools which comprise a C/C++ compiler and LaTeX for building R
manuals and vignettes. Below are links or instructions for different operating
systems.

* Windows:
    - https://cran.rstudio.com/bin/windows/Rtools/
    - https://miktex.org/download


* Mac OS X
    - https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/xcode/id497799835?mt=12
    - http://www.tug.org/mactex/downloading.html

The package can be installed from GitHub using the `devtools` package. It also
requires a modified version of the checkpoint package to be installed. Just
follow the instructions below.

```r
install.packages("devtools")
require(devtools)
install_github("cpfaff/mspm", subdir = "mspm")
install_github("cpfaff/checkpoint", subdir = "mspm")
```

## Getting started

### Create a new project

To create a new project simply call the function below.

```r
require(mspm)
create_project(root_folder = choose.dir(),
	       project_name = compile_project_name(first_name = "Your first name",
					           last_name = "Your last name"))
```

The function creates a new project folder structure in the `root_folder` which
defaults to the current working directory. You should place your projects in a
path where you store all your R projects. You can provide your project name
manually, however here a convenient function is used which compiles a project
name from the information given (YYYY-MM-DD_your_first_name_your_last_name).

Note. The process to create a new project may take a while as it installs an
independent R environment and packages into your new project. Afterwards you
can enable the new project from outside by executing the function below.

```r
require(mspm)
enable_project(project_path = <path_to_the_project_directory>)
```

### Project structure

Below you find an overview about the overall folder structure and a
documentation of the structure and contents.

NOTE: All files that you place somewhere in the structure should be named in
snake case. This means you use meaningful names and separate single words with
an underscore (e.g. snake_case.R, raw_data.csv)

* Full overview

```
2019-02-19_my_full_name
└── project
    ├── data
    │   ├── 01_primary
    │   ├── 02_interim
    │   └── 03_cleaned
    ├── figure
    │   ├── external
    │   └── scripted
    ├── metadata
    │   ├── dataset
    │   └── package
    │       ├── author.dcf
    │       └── checkpoint.dcf
    ├── report
    │   ├── presentation
    │   ├── publication
    │   └── qualification
    └── source
        ├── function
        │   ├── 01_main.R
        │   ├── 02_import_data.R
        │   ├── 03_clean_data.R
        │   ├── 04_transform_data.R
        │   ├── 05_visualise_data.R
        │   └── 06_model_data.R
        ├── library
        │   └── packages.R
        └── workflow
            ├── 01_main.R
            ├── 01_scratchpad.R
            ├── 02_import_data.R
            ├── 03_clean_data.R
            ├── 04_transform_data.R
            ├── 05_visualise_data.R
            └── 06_model_data.R
```

* Data

The data folder is separated into three sub-folders which are prepended with
numbers for a fixed order.

1. Primary data

It stores primary data of your research. Non of your R scripts should write
here.

2. Interim data

Transformed, filtered, merged data products which are important for the
analysis or the results.

3. Cleaned

Cleaned primary data which is used e.g. in modelling, plotting.

```
2019-02-19_my_full_name
└── project
    ├── data
    │   ├── 01_primary
    │   ├── 02_interim
    │   └── 03_cleaned
```

* Figure

The figure folder is divided in two sub-folders.

1. external

Place all figures in here which have not been generated by R itself and are
essential for the report part of your project.

2. scripted

This folder stores figures crated by your R script.

```
2019-02-19_my_full_name
└── project
    ├── figure
    │   ├── external
    │   └── scripted

```


